The work by I. F. Panagopoulos, “The Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures by the Fathers of the Church” (prof., Dr. of Church History A. I. Sidorov)
Patristic exegesis is one of the most important and central areas of Orthodox theology. Just as this entire theology unites apophatics and cataphatics inseparably and incommutably, a similar unity is manifested in the interpretations of the Holy Fathers. On the one hand, they are all imbued with mystery and, in essence, often represent an unsolved (sometimes even unsolvable) mystery of theology; on the other hand, they can be seen to employ a number of ordinary philological techniques and hermeneutical methods. Unfortunately, this unique combination and the harmonious blend of the incomprehensible and the comprehensible in patristic exegesis is rarely grasped by modern researchers, who usually attempt to translate their antinomic resonance into the horizontal plane of discursive thinking. The book by I. F. Panagopoulos under consideration is a remarkable exception in this regard.

 Its author is well acquainted with the history of research in the field of biblical hermeneutics, as evidenced by his “Introduction,” and he himself recognizes himself as a link in the scientific tradition; however, at the same time, being a deeply Orthodox person, he clearly understands the inadequacy (and even the flawed nature) of a number of fundamental principles that dominated and, unfortunately, still dominate this tradition. In particular, he quite rightly notes: “In the history of biblical hermeneutics, the main criterion for evaluating the exegetical tradition of the Fathers has long remained their method of interpretation. This was the only issue that historians of biblical hermeneutics usually addressed thoroughly” (pp. 31–32). This fact manifested itself in a rather primitive and completely inadequate distinction between the Alexandrian and Antiochian “schools” (a term that, in our view, is not very apt), which are supposedly divided by methods of interpretation: allegorical, on the one hand, and literal‑historical, on the other. As I. F. Panagopoulos quite correctly states, “these views are a consequence of scholarly arbitrariness and unfortunate prejudice. Such a division into two ‘methods’ is essentially unknown to the patristic Church Tradition.” According to the spirit of the Holy Fathers, <...> allegory (figurative language) constitutes only one of the many aspects of the biblical meaning. At the same time, there is also a tropological (figurative) meaning, a moral meaning, anagogical (uplifting) meaning, and other meanings, which together form the so‑called “spiritual contemplation” of the Holy Scriptures” (p. 32). In contrast to such a primitive view of church exegesis, dictated by scientific arbitrariness, the author emphasizes the fact that all the interpretations of the Church Fathers were determined by the purpose of those interpretations. And as St. Cyril of Alexandria says, “all divinely inspired Scripture has one purpose in view — the mystery of Christ.” This purpose “is the central theme and the sought‑after subject of the patristic interpretations” (p. 46). A clear understanding of the Christological foundation of church exegesis allows I. F. Panagopoulos to draw the following crucial conclusion: “In the light of the theology of the Incarnation, a gross error becomes apparent in the widely распространённое belief that the dialectic of letter and spirit implies a contrast between historical and spiritual meaning, and, as a consequence, a fundamental difference between the historical and spiritual cosmos, in accordance with Platonic doctrine” (p. 51). Another important point emphasized by the Greek scholar is that an ascetic approach is an indispensable condition for the patristic interpretation of Scripture, and therefore church exegesis is primarily a spiritual endeavor (p. 53) and is unthinkable without attaining humility and purity of heart.

Having revealed these (and a number of similar) profound intuitions of the patristic approach to the Holy Scriptures, I. F. Panagopoulos proceeds to outline the concrete development of church exegesis in the first centuries after the birth of Christ. After reviewing the prehistory of this exegesis and its first steps in the New Testament, among the apostolic fathers and apologists of the 2nd century, he focuses primarily on the Alexandrian exegetical tradition. Here, he devotes a significant portion of his work to Origen, whose contributions to biblical textology and hermeneutics the author considers outstanding. These contributions are indeed significant, but, in our view, the Greek scholar (as well as many scholars who study Origen’s work) overstates them. Enchanted by the freshness and originality of his biblical interpretations” (p. 355), as well as by the aura of “genius” that surrounds the personality of the Alexandrian religious thinker and “didaskalos,” I. F. Panagopoulos tries not to notice the fundamental and profound flaw in his entire worldview, which we define as theological schizophrenia — that is, a rupture and split between two orders of ideas: Christian ideas and Gnostic‑Platonic ideas, which are combined in a purely mechanical way. True, the Greek researcher undoubtedly feels this flaw. For example, when discussing one of Origen’s hermeneutical principles, according to which “Scripture is divinely inspired even in its letter,” I. F. Panagopoulos notes that such literal divinely inspired nature of Scripture “leads Origen to a rather strange understanding of the nature of the biblical word. On the one hand, Origen insists on the necessity of the letter of Scripture as a material code of a certain d…